We briefly discussed the possible utility of tumor gene expression profiling in order to further inform his decision as to whether or not to pursue local therapy now. Tumor gene expression profiling can help to identify patients with tumor genetics more or less favorable and has been shown to have modest predictive value in stratifying long-term risk of metastatic spread.  In his case, the overall favorable characteristics of his tumor make his overall risk for distant metastasis within 10 years low.  Thus we do not recommend expression profiling at this time.

We briefly discussed the role of HIFU and FLA for his case. We discussed that these techniques are not as well established as a radical prostatectomy or radiation and are not considered a standard of care. We discussed that these procedures are typically more favorable from a side effect standpoint, but the control is neither considered to be standard nor as effective. Given his small volume disease and complex history with multiple additional risk factors for both EBRT and radical prostatectomy that the lower risk of side of effects and the ability to follow HIFU with more traditional treatment in the event of an early failure in some ways make this an attractive option for him.

We briefly discussed the possibility of obtaining treatment closer to home at Silver Cross Hospital.  Prior experience with patients requiring the type of treatment we would suggest for him, namely high-intensity ablative radiation with real-time motion tracking, are not available at all treatment centers.  We would recommend that if he decides to pursue EBRT that he do so here at UCH instead of a satellite office.

1. We discussed the natural history of gastrointestinal cancers in the peripancreatic region.  If untreated, it is likely that disease will progress, either locally and/or distantly. We discussed treatment options including ablative radiation therapy alone, surgical resection, chemoRT, chemotherapy only, or observation. Given his prior complicated surgical course he would not be a good candidate for further elective oncologic surgeries. He understands that there is some uncertainty as to whether ablative radiation has been proven to help improve survival in the setting of unresectable disease, but that it may help to preserve his quality of life (QOL). 

2. The primary goal of radiation therapy in this setting is local control and preservation of quality of life. We talked about the role of radiation therapy in the setting of unresectable, unacceptably dangerous and/or morbid surgery. Randomized data on this subject are conflicting, and at least state that the risk benefit ratio is narrow. For him, given that the progression of his disease has only been identified at a single location, it is possible that improvement of local control can translate to a benefit in survival, although this is not guaranteed.  Without local treatment, we would anticipate local progression to compromise his QOL within months to years.  We anticipate an 80% likelihood of local control.  Since our goal would be local control and QOL preservation and since adding chemotherapy would likely decrease his QOL, we favor ablative radiation therapy alone.  

3. The logistics and possible side effects of radiation therapy were discussed. Treatment with ablative radiation would involve delivery of 3-4 fractions of radiation on an every-other-day schedule over the span of 1-2 week. Treatment would involve ~1 hour in our department for each session. Acute toxicity could include fatigue, skin irritation, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, or weight loss. Late toxicity could arise months or even years after the completion of therapy and could include changes to the small bowel / prior anastomosis, which can be mild to moderate or severe. Severe toxicity may include ulceration or obstruction, which requires further workup and/or intervention to attempt to correct. He understands that there is a risk of severe and permanent damage to any irradiated tissue.  In his case, given the proximity of his anastomosis to the site of disease, we estimate a 10-15% chance of severe damage to the bowel.  We consider this a reasonable risk.  Regarding the risks of radiation therapy, he had an opportunity ask questions, all of which were answered to his satisfaction. 

4. We briefly discussed the possibility of obtaining treatment closer to home at Silver Cross Hospital.  Prior experience with patients requiring the type of treatment we would suggest for him (namely high-intensity ablative radiation with real-time motion tracking) are not available at all treatment centers.  We would recommend that if he decides to pursue EBRT that he do so here at UCH instead of a satellite office.

5. After hearing the above, he felt comfortable moving forward promptly with radiation therapy as discussed above.  He has been scheduled for simulation on 8/12/2021.  Informed consent was obtained. 
