We briefly discussed the possible utility of tumor gene expression profiling in order to further inform his decision as to whether or not to pursue local therapy now. Tumor gene expression profiling can help to identify patients with tumor genetics more or less favorable and has been shown to have modest predictive value in stratifying long-term risk of metastatic spread.  In his case, the overall favorable characteristics of his tumor make his overall risk for distant metastasis within 10 years low.  Thus we do not recommend expression profiling at this time.

We briefly discussed the role of HIFU and FLA for his case. We discussed that these techniques are not as well established as a radical prostatectomy or radiation and are not considered a standard of care. We discussed that these procedures are typically more favorable from a side effect standpoint, but the control is neither considered to be standard nor as effective. Given his small volume disease and complex history with multiple additional risk factors for both EBRT and radical prostatectomy that the lower risk of side of effects and the ability to follow HIFU with more traditional treatment in the event of an early failure in some ways make this an attractive option for him.

We briefly discussed the possibility of obtaining treatment closer to home at Silver Cross Hospital.  Prior experience with patients requiring the type of treatment we would suggest for him, namely high-intensity ablative radiation with real-time motion tracking, are not available at all treatment centers.  We would recommend that if he decides to pursue EBRT that he do so here at UCH instead of a satellite office.

1. We discussed the natural history of gastrointestinal cancers in the peripancreatic region.  If untreated, it is likely that disease will progress, either locally and/or distantly. We discussed treatment options including ablative radiation therapy alone, surgical resection, chemoRT, chemotherapy only, or observation. Given his prior complicated surgical course he would not be a good candidate for further elective oncologic surgeries. He understands that there is some uncertainty as to whether ablative radiation has been proven to help improve survival in the setting of unresectable disease, but that it may help to preserve his quality of life (QOL). 

2. The primary goal of radiation therapy in this setting is local control and preservation of quality of life. We talked about the role of radiation therapy in the setting of unresectable, unacceptably dangerous and/or morbid surgery. Randomized data on this subject are conflicting, and at least state that the risk benefit ratio is narrow. For him, given that the progression of his disease has only been identified at a single location, it is possible that improvement of local control can translate to a benefit in survival, although this is not guaranteed.  Without local treatment, we would anticipate local progression to compromise his QOL within months to years.  We anticipate an 80% likelihood of local control.  Since our goal would be local control and QOL preservation and since adding chemotherapy would likely decrease his QOL, we favor ablative radiation therapy alone.  

3. The logistics and possible side effects of radiation therapy were discussed. Treatment with ablative radiation would involve delivery of 3-4 fractions of radiation on an every-other-day schedule over the span of 1-2 week. Treatment would involve ~1 hour in our department for each session. Acute toxicity could include fatigue, skin irritation, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, or weight loss. Late toxicity could arise months or even years after the completion of therapy and could include changes to the small bowel / prior anastomosis, which can be mild to moderate or severe. Severe toxicity may include ulceration or obstruction, which requires further workup and/or intervention to attempt to correct. He understands that there is a risk of severe and permanent damage to any irradiated tissue.  In his case, given the proximity of his anastomosis to the site of disease, we estimate a 10-15% chance of severe damage to the bowel.  We consider this a reasonable risk.  Regarding the risks of radiation therapy, he had an opportunity ask questions, all of which were answered to his satisfaction. 

4. We briefly discussed the possibility of obtaining treatment closer to home at Silver Cross Hospital.  Prior experience with patients requiring the type of treatment we would suggest for him (namely high-intensity ablative radiation with real-time motion tracking) are not available at all treatment centers.  We would recommend that if he decides to pursue EBRT that he do so here at UCH instead of a satellite office.

5. After hearing the above, he felt comfortable moving forward promptly with radiation therapy as discussed above.  He has been scheduled for simulation on 8/12/2021.  Informed consent was obtained. 
In consideration of his disease risk factors and relative health, he is at risk for prostate cancer mortality without treatment.

. In his case, we recommended short term ADT because of the Gleason 9 disease

More aggressive therapy such as 2nd generation drugs (e.g. abiraterone) would also be a consideration

1. For patients with advanced stage Mycosis Fungoides with extensive cutaneous involvement, which we believe that he has, total skin electron beam (TSEB) therapy can result in good treatment response and improvement in quality of life. TSEB has a good chance of providing relief of his symptoms and offering local control of his disease. The chance for a partial or complete response in the skin is ~50-80% for advanced stage disease, with complete response occuring during or shortly after treatment. Unfortunately, by one year after therapy relapses can occur in ~50%. In the event of relapse or incomplete response to initial therapy, we could consider treating with TSEB again.  We typically deliver 12 Gy to the total skin with a 8 Gy boost as needed to underdosed regions, per the Stanford Experience.
 
2. We reviewed the logistics of total skin treatment. We discussed that in our approach, TSEB would involve 10 days of treatment spread over a period of 3 weeks and that treatment may require breaks during treatment due to toxicity and could require treatment to be spread over 4-5 weeks.  Each treatment would require approximately 30 min - 1 hour in our department with him standing on a pedestal which rotates, with the support of a bar above his head. 
 
3. We specifically discussed the rationale, risks, benefits, alternatives, as well as possible acute and chronic toxicities of radiation therapy, including erythema, desquamation, alopecia, blisters, skin pain, hyperpigmentation. Lesions can become superinfected. Late effects on the skin and glands can include loss of fingernails (usually 2-4 months afterwards) and loss of ability to sweat which can lead to chronically dry skin. It is possible that some areas will have permanent alopecia or telangiectasias. He understands there can be severe and permanent damage to any irradiated tissue. He had an opportunity to ask questions, all of which were answered to his satisfaction.  
 
4. After hearing the above, he felt most comfortable exploring options for treatment closer to home.  If he is not able to find a provider closer to where he lives, he would be willing to travel to UCMC for treatment. In making some calls, it does appear that U Iowa can provide this treatment; we will refer him to see someone there.

 We discussed the current perception that there is probable recurrence after his prior local therapy for prostate cancer.  Conventional imaging including CT and bone scan suggests that the area of recurrence is in the left proximal femur.  He is currently asymptomatic in that area.  While the CT does not demonstrate any obvious abnormality at the prostate, it is possible that he also has a local recurrence.  Waging with a more sensitive study such as PSMA PET, would be helpful to better understand the burden of disease.  If he has a single site of metastatic recurrence we could consider treating this with radiation on top of the hormonal therapy.  However if he has multiple sites of recurrence, including the previously radiated prostate, then the value in treating the suspected areas of disease is more challenged by the additional risks of therapy.
 Given that he has metastatic recurrence, he will likely be treated with hormonal therapy (ADT). Potential side effects of hormonal therapy can include hot flashes, decreased libido, changes to blood pressure, weight, glucose control, and cholesterol, decreased bone mineral density, and potential changes in mood changes and energy level.  When combined with radiation, hormonal therapy can augment the effects of radiation.  If he begins ADT, we would recommend he begin Vitamin D 1000 IU/day and calcium 1200-1500 mg/day, and having a baseline testosterone level and bone mineral density study checked. 
In his case, we recommended that he could consider either local therapy or surveillance. 
 ADT could be given over a period of 2 years, 4 months, with reassessment after 4-6 months to confirm tolerance of therapy. ADT would typically precede RT by 2 months. 


 
4.  After hearing this conversation, he wished to take some time to make a decision.  He currently leans towards having a lymph node dissection.  We talked about the pros and cons of this, relative to doing RT/ADT.  One advantage is that this does have a chance, albeit low, to cure the remaining disease with further surgery. If this does not work, he could then still be eligible to receive further therapy including radiation and hormonal therapy.  One con might be that his risk of lymphedema with the combination of surgery and radiation to follow would be worse than radiation upfront.  He likes the idea of deferring radiation in order to allow himself more time to recover from the prostatectomy, as well as see if he can avoid the radiation completely. This is a reasonable line of thought. We did discuss that with his younger age that secondary cancers from radiation become a more relevant discussion and avoidance of radiation therapy would be great if not needed.  He will continue to follow-up with his local providers and a surgeon to do the lymph node dissection if he goes that route.  If he needs radiation, he is likely to receive this at our network site, Silver Cross Hospital.\

We also discussed adding a second generation drug like abiraterone which may further improve outcomes


 We described that there could be a theoretical chance that this would cure the disease, but that this would be a very low likelihood.  More likely, he could experience a benefit in terms of progression free survival, which would be a delay the next line of systemic therapy, such as enzalutamide.  We discussed that if his PSA were to rise further, he would be a candidate to receive a PSMA PET.  Based on what this shows he could be evaluated for further radiation therapy with a similar line of thinking that this could delay the need for future therapy.



6. Encouraged smoke cessation, and weight loss. 

In his case, his cardiac health significantly increases his risk should he choose to undergo local therapy, and decreases the likelihood that his prostate cancer will limit his lifespan.  Based on our extensive discussion, he likely will be on anticoagulation for at least the next year.  We recommend active surveillance for the intermediate term as discussed above, with close follow-up of his PSA and symptoms, regular re-evaluation of the risk/benefit analysis should his cardiac condition be resolved, and early intervention as needed. 
4. In order to mitigate the potential increased risk of late bowel toxicity including bleeding, we recommended that a hydrogel spacer (SpaceOAR) be placed between his rectum and prostate for all patients requiring of anticoagulation at the time of treatment.  The hydrogel, which is absorbed by the body over the year following placement, provides 3 months of additional separation between the bowel and the prostate.  This hydrogel spacer is scheduled along with the CT and gold fiducial placement in our department.



1. We discussed the natural history of high-risk prostate cancer, which he seems to have on the basis of his records available to us today. We spoke of the option of active surveillance as weighed against local treatment. This discussion is justified as it can be difficult to estimate how to relate the natural history of cancer progression with the life expectancy of the individual. Surveillance would imply a q6 month clinic visit with repeat PSA and clinical exam (at least until clinical stability is proven, perhaps over the first year), and then repeat prostate biopsy as often as q1year. The primary benefit of this approach is that he may avoid the quality of life problems which could arise with local treatment, which would possibly not even help improve his survival given the greater probability that he would die of a non-cancer cause. The primary disadvantage is that he may eventually need local treatment and a delay in therapy could compromise his chance for cure.  
In his case, we recommended local therapy. He was most comfortable to proceed with [list his choice here].
2. We discussed local therapy options, including radical prostatectomy, external beam RT (EBRT), and seed implant or brachytherapy. Each of these has perhaps a 70% chance of biochemical control at 5 years, and a moderate likelihood of durable control beyond that. Surgical risks include difficulty with continence and sexual function. Radiation risks include irritation to the bladder and bowel as well as an effect on sexual function. In the long term, risks of severe side effects are similar with either approach. We discussed brachytherapy boost and combined abiraterone as ways to help improve the chance of cure above EBRT and standard ADT. 
3.  The logistics and possible side effects of radiation therapy were discussed with him. EBRT would go over a continuous 4-5 weeks, Monday through Friday, and require about 1 hour in our department for each treatment. Brachytherapy involves an outpatient procedure in the OR with urology under general anesthesia. Acute toxicity could include urinary frequency, dysuria, urinary urgency, increased bowel movement frequency, rectal urgency, and fatigue. Late toxicity could arise months or even years after the completion of therapy and could include changes to urinary and bowel habits, which can be mild to moderate (5-20%) or severe (~2-5%). Severe toxicity may include hematuria, or hematochezia, which requires further workup and/or intervention to attempt to correct. Additionally there is a moderate risk for decline in sexual function after radiation therapy, which may occur gradually, and may or may not respond to sexual medicines or devices. He understands that there is a risk of severe and permanent damage to any irradiated tissue, although the risk of such damage is very low. There is a 0.5% risk of radiation-related secondary cancer over a 15-year period. Regarding the risks of radiation therapy, he had an opportunity to ask questions, all of which were answered to his satisfaction. Informed consent was obtained. If we proceed to radiation planning, we recommend placement of gold fiducial markers to assist with patient alignment during radiation treatment. We will schedule this on the same day of the CT simulation in our department. 
We had an extensive discussion regarding the role for androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). We reviewed side effects including hot flashes, fatigue, breast tenderness, and decreased libido. For high risk prostate cancer treated with standard doses of external beam RT, ADT can help improve biochemical control and survival.  ADT would precede RT by 2 months. For men with T3 disease, 2 years and 4 months of ADT could be considered standard. If he begins ADT, we would recommend he begin Vitamin D 1000 IU/day and calcium 1200-1500 mg/day. If he has this therapy here, we will order a bone mineral density study. 
4. After hearing the above, he felt most comfortable deciding to have RT and standard hormonal therapy and giving more thought to brachytherapy boost or abiraterone with RT/ADT. Dr. Szmulewitz will follow-up with him to further discuss abiraterone. His candidacy for brachytherapy is not entirely certain (larger prostate gland size which may shrink on ADT; need to survey baseline urinary symptoms with IPSS) but this could be considered if he does not proceed with abiraterone. 
5. Labs were drawn today and are above. 




 We further discussed the possibility of combined hormonal therapy using Abiraterone in addition to standard ADT as a way to increase the likelihood of cure above that of traditional EBRT + ADT at the expense of more severe side effects including joint pain, fatigue, and changes in blood pressure.In his case, we suggested that he could consider local therapy because of his life expectancy >15 years and primary Gleason 4 prostate cancer, although the low volume of disease and long history of PSA surveillance and biopsy also suggests an indolent process for which surveillance could be considered. In his case, we suggested that he could consider local therapy because of his life expectancy >15 years and primary Glea
son 4 prostate cancer, although the low volume of disease and long history of PSA surveillance and biopsy also suggests
an indolent process for which surveillance could be considered.

His most recent PSA of 0.05 does not meet criteria for biochemical failure and also does not meet the criteria used in the randomized studies which tested the role of early salvage radiation in comparison to adjuvant radiation.  Given the slow rate of rise observed so far, we recommend further surveillance with repeat PSA measurements, such as at 6 month intervals.  This will allow him to delay or avoid further treatment (if the PSA rises very slowly or does not rise) and preserve his immediate quality of life.  

NOADT 
We had an extensive discussion regarding the role for androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). We reviewed side effects including hot flashes, fatigue, breast tenderness, decreased libido, and potential effects on metabolism (inclusive of weight gain, effects on hypertension or diabetes, cholesterol control, and heart health) and bone health. It is unclear in this case whether benefits outweigh risks with regard to the addition of ADT, and it was suggested he would be a good candidate for RT without ADT.NOADT 

NOBRACHY
Because of his (***moderate baseline urinary dysfunction OR large prostate gland size OR IPSS score > 15 OR ...), we did not prioritize brachytherapy for him and focused on discussing external beam radiation as the preferred radiation option.
